GMM clustering is a powerful method.
A couple of the advantages it gives us, is that one,
it provides us with a soft clustering,
so a sample membership of multiple clusterings.
And so that can be useful in cases where
you're for example let's say you're classifying documents
and you want each document to be part of
multiple topics or multiple categories and so that's useful in those scenarios.
But in addition to that, it also gives us flexibility in the shapes of clusters.
So like the example we looked at,
a cluster can contain another cluster inside of it.
On the other hand in terms of disadvantages,
GMM clustering is sensitive to initialization values.
It's possible to converge to a local optimum and it's a slow convergence rate.
Otherwise, it's a pretty useful and strong and powerful clustering algorithm
as we'll see in the couple of the applications that we'll look at.
So the first application we'll look at is this really cool paper,
which uses GMM clustering or Gaussian Mixture Models specifically,
to make sense of a vast number of sensor readings.
And so one dataset that it looks at is accelerometer reading.
And so let's say you give people accelerometers to carry in their pockets and then
you get the readings and you try to make sense of those readings.
Gaussian Mixture Models were useful here in terms of creating
a vocabulary of what different activities look like.
And so commuting looks sort of like this,
and office work looks like this,
and these can be estimated by Gaussian mixtures,
so you can learn them and then you can use them to
identify the different activities just based on the accelerometer reading.
The paper also has another dataset of velocity so this is based on GPS readings.
And so using those GPS readings and using a Gaussian Mixture Model clustering,
you can detect when people are using bikes or moving in a bike,
or in a bus, or in a subway,
based on estimating and finding out and learning
basically a Gaussian Mixture Model for what that activity looks like.
So this is the velocity and this would be the density.
So when you're riding a bike,
most of the time you're at this speed of let's say two or three meters per second,
and so that's the spike there.
And so I highly recommend reading this paper and looking
at how they utilize GMMs in this application.
It's also useful to use Gaussian mixture models to classify Pulsar stars in astronomy.
That's a common usage,
you'll find number of papers,
this is one of them.
Gaussian Mixture Models have also been used for a long time in biometrics.
So speaker verification, this is one example as a paper,
but it's also been used to identify signatures of people,
fingerprints, and a number of other sort of biometrics.
I would say that by far the coolest the uses
for Gaussian Mixture Models are in computer vision.
And this is one example.
So this is a model that we feed this picture to,
and we also feed this streaming video to.
And what it does is it detects the background
and subtracts it from the initial image here.
So what this does is actually it gives each pixel a Gaussian Mixture Model,
and then uses this streaming video to learn a model,
a Gaussian mixture for what actually happens in that pixel across multiple frames,
and then using that it can detect the background.
So the background we can basically identify it
as the element that's common in maybe in most,
not all, but maybe most of the frames.
So once we identify it we can identify
what is in the foreground and then we can subtract it from the top here.
So if we roll it back here,
you can see how we have this cars here and then slowly as we learn the model,
we can make them disappear.
So we have identified what is a background in
what is a foreground and so we can do something cool like this.
This is a different paper,
but it does pretty much the same thing.
This is also background subtraction using Gaussian mixture models.
So here, once we identify the background, we subtract it.
And so what we're left with is the objects in the foreground.
So we can use it to track people,
identify things that are moving in a camera feed let's say here.
And so these and other example papers are linked in the text below.